# Chess Novel

Stefan Zweig

On the large passenger ship that was to departe at midnight from Buenos Aires to New York, the usual bustle and commotion of the last hour prevailed. Guests from land hurried here and there in confusion, giving escort to their friends, telegraph boys with crooked caps shouted names through the reception rooms, boxes and flowers were brought, children ran around inquisitively up and down stairs, while the orchestra unflappingly played the deck show. I stood in conversation with an acquaintance a little aside from this turmoil on the Promenade deck, when near us two or three flashbulbs went off sharply: apparently there was some prominent person rushing in right before the departure being interviewed by reporters and being photographed. My friend looked at them and laughed. "We have a rare bird on board, Czantovic." And since I evidently made a sufficiently uncomprehending face at this announcement, he went on, explaining: "Mirko Czentovic, the world champion chess master. He has beaten tournament players all cross America from east to west and he goes now to new triumphs in Argentina. "

And now I remembered this young world champion and even some details in connection with his stratospheric career. My friend, a more observant newspaper reader than I, was able to to provide a series of anecdotes. Czentovic had for about a year at one series played against the proven senior champtions of the art of chess, like Alechin, Capablanca, Tartakover, Lasker, Bogoljubov; not since the debut of the seven year old Wunderkind Rzewski at the 1922 New York chess tourney had there been an introduction of a complete unknown in the glorious guild that stirred up such a universal sensation. Then Czentovic's intellectual characteristics at the start did not in anyway appear to clearly suggest such a dazzling career. Already the secret began to slip out that he wasn't able to write even one sentence in any language without spelling errors, and how angry reproaching colleagues jeered "your lack of education was universal over all areas." The son of a dead-poor south slavic Donau sailor, whose tiny barge one night was run over by a corn steamship, was at twelve years old after the death of his father was taken up by a parson from a distant village in pity, and the good father took sincere troubles, through economical support to make good, what the broad-browed, dull, taciturn child in the village school was not able to learn. Mirko stared for the hundreth time as he explained to him the character but they remained unknown to him; even for the simplest school subject his slow-heavy-working braind failed to hold the work. When he would calculate, he even needed for fourteen years each finger to give help, and reading a book or newspaper meant for the almost half-grown youth a special effort. However in no way could one call Mirko unwilling or obstinate. He did obediently whatever one ordered him to do: carrying water, splitting wood, working together in the fields, clearing the kitchen and finishing reliably, although with exasperating slowness, each demanded service. But what most bothered the Pastor about this contrary boy was his total apathy. He did nothing without being ordered, never asked a question, never played with other boys
